118th CONGRESS
  1st Session
                                H. R. 4542

   To support research, development, and other activities to develop
        innovative vehicle technologies, and for other purposes.


_______________________________________________________________________


                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                             July 11, 2023

  Mrs. Dingell (for herself and Ms. Stevens) introduced the following
   bill; which was referred to the Committee on Science, Space, and
 Technology, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce,
for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case
for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of
                        the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

                                 A BILL



   To support research, development, and other activities to develop
        innovative vehicle technologies, and for other purposes.

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Vehicle Innovation Act of 2023''.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

    In this Act:
            (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the
        Department of Energy.
            (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary
        of Energy.

SEC. 3. OBJECTIVES.

    The objectives of this Act are--
            (1) to establish a consistent and consolidated authority
        for the vehicle technology program at the Department;
            (2) to develop United States technologies and practices
        that improve the fuel efficiency and emissions of all vehicles
        produced in the United States;
            (3) to support domestic research, development, engineering,
        demonstration, and commercial application and manufacturing of
        advanced vehicles, engines, and components;
            (4) to enable vehicles to move larger volumes of goods and
        more passengers with less energy and emissions;
            (5) to develop cost-effective advanced technologies for
        wide-scale utilization throughout the passenger, commercial,
        government, and transit vehicle sectors;
            (6) to allow for greater consumer choice of vehicle
        technologies and fuels;
            (7) shorten technology development and integration cycles
        in the vehicle industry;
            (8) to ensure a proper balance and diversity of Federal
        investment in vehicle technologies; and
            (9) to strengthen partnerships between Federal and State
        governmental agencies and the private and academic sectors.

SEC. 4. COORDINATION AND NONDUPLICATION.

    The Secretary shall ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that
the activities authorized by this Act do not duplicate those of other
programs within the Department or other relevant research agencies.

SEC. 5. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

    There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for
research, development, engineering, demonstration, and commercial
application of vehicles and related technologies in the United States,
including activities authorized under this Act--
            (1) for fiscal year 2024, $313,567,000;
            (2) for fiscal year 2025, $326,109,000;
            (3) for fiscal year 2026, $339,154,000;
            (4) for fiscal year 2027, $352,720,000; and
            (5) for fiscal year 2028, $366,829,000.

SEC. 6. REPORTING.

    (a) Technologies Developed.--Not later than 18 months after the
date of enactment of this Act and annually thereafter through 2028, the
Secretary shall submit to Congress a report regarding the technologies
developed as a result of the activities authorized by this Act, with a
particular emphasis on whether the technologies were successfully
adopted for commercial applications, and if so, whether products
relying on those technologies are manufactured in the United States.
    (b) Additional Matters.--At the end of each fiscal year through
2028, the Secretary shall submit to the relevant Congressional
committees of jurisdiction an annual report describing activities
undertaken in the previous year under this Act, active industry
participants, the status of public-private partnerships, progress of
the program in meeting goals and timelines, and a strategic plan for
funding of activities across agencies.

SEC. 7. VEHICLE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.

    (a) Program.--
            (1) Activities.--The Secretary shall conduct a program of
        basic and applied research, development, engineering,
        demonstration, and commercial application activities on
        materials, technologies, and processes with the potential to
        substantially reduce petroleum use and the emissions of the
        passenger and commercial vehicles of the United States,
        including activities in the areas of--
                    (A) electrification of vehicle systems;
                    (B) batteries, ultracapacitors, and other energy
                storage devices;
                    (C) power electronics;
                    (D) vehicle, component, and subsystem manufacturing
                technologies and processes;
                    (E) engine efficiency and combustion optimization;
                    (F) waste heat recovery;
                    (G) transmission and drivetrains;
                    (H) hydrogen vehicle technologies, including fuel
                cells and internal combustion engines, and hydrogen
                infrastructure, including hydrogen energy storage to
                enable renewables and provide hydrogen for fuel and
                power;
                    (I) natural gas vehicle technologies;
                    (J) aerodynamics, rolling resistance (including
                tires and wheel assemblies), and accessory power loads
                of vehicles and associated equipment;
                    (K) vehicle weight reduction, including
                lightweighting materials and the development of
                manufacturing processes to fabricate, assemble, and use
                dissimilar materials;
                    (L) friction and wear reduction;
                    (M) engine and component durability;
                    (N) innovative propulsion systems;
                    (O) advanced boosting systems;
                    (P) hydraulic hybrid technologies;
                    (Q) engine compatibility with and optimization for
                a variety of transportation fuels including natural gas
                and other liquid and gaseous fuels;
                    (R) predictive engineering, modeling, and
                simulation of vehicle and transportation systems;
                    (S) refueling and charging infrastructure for
                alternative fueled and electric or plug-in electric
                hybrid vehicles, including the unique challenges facing
                rural areas;
                    (T) gaseous fuels storage systems and system
                integration and optimization;
                    (U) sensing, communications, and actuation
                technologies for vehicle, electrical grid, and
                infrastructure;
                    (V) efficient use, substitution, and recycling of
                potentially critical materials in vehicles, including
                rare earth elements and precious metals, at risk of
                supply disruption;
                    (W) aftertreatment technologies;
                    (X) thermal management of battery systems;
                    (Y) retrofitting advanced vehicle technologies to
                existing vehicles;
                    (Z) development of common standards,
                specifications, and architectures for both
                transportation and stationary battery applications;
                    (AA) advanced internal combustion engines;
                    (BB) mild hybrid;
                    (CC) engine down speeding;
                    (DD) vehicle-to-vehicle, vehicle-to-pedestrian, and
                vehicle-to-infrastructure technologies; and
                    (EE) other research areas as determined by the
                Secretary.
            (2) Transformational technology.--The Secretary shall
        ensure that the Department continues to support research,
        development, engineering, demonstration, and commercial
        application activities and maintains competency in mid- to
        long-term transformational vehicle technologies with potential
        to achieve reductions in emissions, including activities in the
        areas of--
                    (A) hydrogen vehicle technologies, including fuel
                cells, hydrogen storage, infrastructure, and activities
                in hydrogen technology validation and safety codes and
                standards;
                    (B) multiple battery chemistries and novel energy
                storage devices, including nonchemical batteries and
                electromechanical storage technologies such as
                hydraulics, flywheels, and compressed air storage;
                    (C) communication and connectivity among vehicles,
                infrastructure, and the electrical grid; and
                    (D) other innovative technologies research and
                development, as determined by the Secretary.
            (3) Industry participation.--
                    (A) In general.--To the maximum extent practicable,
                activities under this Act shall be carried out in
                partnership or collaboration with automotive
                manufacturers, heavy commercial, vocational, and
                transit vehicle manufacturers, qualified plug-in
                electric vehicle manufacturers, compressed natural gas
                vehicle manufacturers, vehicle and engine equipment and
                component manufacturers, manufacturing equipment
                manufacturers, advanced vehicle service providers, fuel
                producers and energy suppliers, electric utilities,
                universities, national laboratories, and independent
                research laboratories.
                    (B) Requirements.--In carrying out this Act, the
                Secretary shall--
                            (i) determine whether a wide range of
                        companies that manufacture or assemble vehicles
                        or components in the United States are
                        represented in ongoing public-private
                        partnership activities, including firms that
                        have not traditionally participated in
                        federally sponsored research and development
                        activities, and where possible, partner with
                        such firms that conduct significant and
                        relevant research and development activities in
                        the United States;
                            (ii) leverage the capabilities and
                        resources of, and formalize partnerships with,
                        industry-led stakeholder organizations,
                        nonprofit organizations, industry consortia,
                        and trade associations with expertise in the
                        research and development of, and education and
                        outreach activities in, advanced automotive and
                        commercial vehicle technologies;
                            (iii) develop more effective processes for
                        transferring research findings and technologies
                        to industry;
                            (iv) support public-private partnerships,
                        dedicated to overcoming barriers in commercial
                        application of transformational vehicle
                        technologies, that use such industry-led
                        technology development facilities of entities
                        with demonstrated expertise in successfully
                        designing and engineering pre-commercial
                        generations of such transformational
                        technology; and
                            (v) promote efforts to ensure that
                        technology research, development, engineering,
                        and commercial application activities funded
                        under this Act are carried out in the United
                        States.
            (4) Interagency and intraagency coordination.--To the
        maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall coordinate
        research, development, demonstration, and commercial
        application activities among--
                    (A) relevant programs within the Department,
                including--
                            (i) the Office of Energy Efficiency and
                        Renewable Energy;
                            (ii) the Office of Science;
                            (iii) the Office of Electricity Delivery
                        and Energy Reliability;
                            (iv) the Office of Fossil Energy;
                            (v) the Advanced Research Projects Agency--
                        Energy; and
                            (vi) other offices as determined by the
                        Secretary; and
                    (B) relevant technology research and development
                programs within other Federal agencies, as determined
                by the Secretary.
            (5) Federal demonstration of technologies.--The Secretary
        shall make information available to procurement programs of
        Federal agencies regarding the potential to demonstrate
        technologies resulting from activities funded through programs
        under this Act.
            (6) Intergovernmental coordination.--The Secretary shall
        seek opportunities to leverage resources and support
        initiatives of State and local governments in developing and
        promoting advanced vehicle technologies, manufacturing, and
        infrastructure.
            (7) Criteria.--In awarding grants under the program under
        this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to those
        technologies (either individually or as part of a system)
        that--
                    (A) provide the greatest aggregate fuel savings
                based on the reasonable projected sales volumes of the
                technology; and
                    (B) provide the greatest increase in United States
                employment.
            (8) Secondary use applications.--
                    (A) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a
                research, development, and demonstration program that--
                            (i) builds on any work carried out under
                        section 915 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005
                        (42 U.S.C. 16195);
                            (ii) identifies possible uses of a vehicle
                        battery after the useful life of the battery in
                        a vehicle has been exhausted;
                            (iii) conducts long-term testing to verify
                        performance and degradation predictions and
                        lifetime valuations for secondary uses;
                            (iv) evaluates innovative approaches to
                        recycling materials from plug-in electric drive
                        vehicles and the batteries used in plug-in
                        electric drive vehicles;
                            (v)(I) assesses the potential for markets
                        for uses described in clause (ii) to develop;
                        and
                            (II) identifies any barriers to the
                        development of those markets; and
                            (vi) identifies the potential uses of a
                        vehicle battery--
                                    (I) with the most promise for
                                market development; and
                                    (II) for which market development
                                would be aided by a demonstration
                                project.
                    (B) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date
                of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to
                the appropriate committees of Congress an initial
                report on the findings of the program described in
                subparagraph (A), including recommendations for
                stationary energy storage and other potential
                applications for batteries used in plug-in electric
                drive vehicles.
                    (C) Secondary use demonstration.--
                            (i) In general.--Based on the results of
                        the program described in subparagraph (A), the
                        Secretary shall develop guidelines for projects
                        that demonstrate the secondary uses and
                        innovative recycling of vehicle batteries.
                            (ii) Publication of guidelines.--Not later
                        than 18 months after the date of enactment of
                        this Act, the Secretary shall--
                                    (I) publish the guidelines
                                described in clause (i); and
                                    (II) solicit applications for
                                funding for demonstration projects.
                            (iii) Pilot demonstration program.--Not
                        later than 21 months after the date of
                        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall
                        select proposals for grant funding under this
                        subsection, based on an assessment of which
                        proposals are mostly likely to contribute to
                        the development of a secondary market for
                        batteries.
    (b) Manufacturing.--The Secretary shall carry out a research,
development, engineering, demonstration, and commercial application
program of advanced vehicle manufacturing technologies and practices,
including innovative processes--
            (1) to increase the production rate and decrease the cost
        of advanced battery and fuel cell manufacturing;
            (2) to vary the capability of individual manufacturing
        facilities to accommodate different battery chemistries and
        configurations;
            (3) to reduce waste streams, emissions, and energy
        intensity of vehicle, engine, advanced battery, and component
        manufacturing processes;
            (4) to recycle and remanufacture used batteries and other
        vehicle components for reuse in vehicles or stationary
        applications;
            (5) to develop manufacturing processes to effectively
        fabricate, assemble, and produce cost-effective lightweight
        materials such as advanced aluminum and other metal alloys,
        polymeric composites, and carbon fiber for use in vehicles;
            (6) to produce lightweight high pressure storage systems
        for gaseous fuels;
            (7) to design and manufacture purpose-built hydrogen fuel
        cell vehicles and components;
            (8) to improve the calendar life and cycle life of advanced
        batteries; and
            (9) to produce permanent magnets for advanced vehicles.

SEC. 8. MEDIUM- AND HEAVY-DUTY COMMERCIAL AND TRANSIT VEHICLES PROGRAM.

    The Secretary, in partnership with relevant research and
development programs in other Federal agencies, and a range of
appropriate industry stakeholders, shall carry out a program of
cooperative research, development, demonstration, and commercial
application activities on advanced technologies for medium- to heavy-
duty commercial, vocational, recreational, and transit vehicles,
including activities in the areas of--
            (1) engine efficiency and combustion research;
            (2) onboard storage technologies for compressed and
        liquefied natural gas;
            (3) development and integration of engine technologies
        designed for natural gas operation of a variety of vehicle
        platforms;
            (4) waste heat recovery and conversion;
            (5) improved aerodynamics and tire rolling resistance;
            (6) energy and space-efficient emissions control systems;
            (7) mild hybrid, heavy hybrid, hybrid hydraulic, plug-in
        hybrid, and electric platforms, and energy storage
        technologies;
            (8) drivetrain optimization;
            (9) friction and wear reduction;
            (10) engine idle and parasitic energy loss reduction;
            (11) electrification of accessory loads;
            (12) onboard sensing and communications technologies;
            (13) advanced lightweighting materials and vehicle designs;
            (14) increasing load capacity per vehicle;
            (15) thermal management of battery systems;
            (16) recharging infrastructure;
            (17) compressed natural gas infrastructure;
            (18) advanced internal combustion engines;
            (19) complete vehicle and power pack modeling, simulation,
        and testing;
            (20) hydrogen vehicle technologies, including fuel cells
        and internal combustion engines, and hydrogen infrastructure,
        including hydrogen energy storage to enable renewables and
        provide hydrogen for fuel and power;
            (21) retrofitting advanced technologies onto existing truck
        fleets;
            (22) advanced boosting systems;
            (23) engine down speeding; and
            (24) integration of these and other advanced systems onto a
        single truck and trailer platform.

SEC. 9. CLASS 8 TRUCK AND TRAILER SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATION.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary shall conduct a competitive grant
program to demonstrate the integration of multiple advanced
technologies on Class 8 truck and trailer platforms, including a
combination of technologies listed in section 8.
    (b) Applicant Teams.--Applicant teams may be comprised of truck and
trailer manufacturers, engine and component manufacturers, fleet
customers, university researchers, and other applicants as appropriate
for the development and demonstration of integrated Class 8 truck and
trailer systems.

SEC. 10. TECHNOLOGY TESTING AND METRICS.

    The Secretary, in coordination with the partners of the interagency
research program described in section 8--
            (1) shall develop standard testing procedures and
        technologies for evaluating the performance of advanced heavy
        vehicle technologies under a range of representative duty
        cycles and operating conditions, including for heavy hybrid
        propulsion systems;
            (2) shall evaluate heavy vehicle performance using work
        performance-based metrics other than those based on miles per
        gallon, including those based on units of volume and weight
        transported for freight applications, and appropriate metrics
        based on the work performed by nonroad systems; and
            (3) may construct heavy duty truck and bus testing
        facilities.

SEC. 11. NONROAD SYSTEMS PILOT PROGRAM.

    The Secretary shall undertake a pilot program of research,
development, demonstration, and commercial applications of technologies
to improve total machine or system efficiency for nonroad mobile
equipment including agricultural, construction, air, and sea port
equipment, and shall seek opportunities to transfer relevant research
findings and technologies between the nonroad and on-highway equipment
and vehicle sectors.

SEC. 12. REPEAL OF EXISTING AUTHORITIES.

    (a) In General.--Sections 706, 711, 712, and 933 of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 16051, 16061, 16062, 16233) are repealed.
    (b) Energy Efficiency.--Section 911 of the Energy Policy Act of
2005 (42 U.S.C. 16191) is amended--
            (1) in subsection (a)--
                    (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``vehicles,
                buildings,'' and inserting ``buildings''; and
                    (B) in paragraph (2)--
                            (i) by striking subparagraph (A); and
                            (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B)
                        through (E) as subparagraphs (A) through (D),
                        respectively; and
            (2) in subsection (c)--
                    (A) by striking paragraph (3);
                    (B) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph
                (3); and
                    (C) in paragraph (3) (as so redesignated), by
                striking ``(a)(2)(D)'' and inserting ``(a)(2)(C)''.
                                 <all>